Even though I'm a little stuffed up and so on, there's usually more trouble in
turning into... Tom, the tape is rolling. Okay, we got the tape rolling. Could
you first of all just say a little bit about your first exposure to science
fiction back when you were a teenager? Oh, way back, even pre-teenage. I'd say
probably grammar school. I was a very fast reader, very advanced reader. And I
was reading both classical stuff and the stuff in the libraries and so on from
third and fourth grade. I very much remember reading Wells and Burns and
shocking teachers by turning in book reports on them in elementary school.
Probably the most formative influence, which is sadly no longer around, nor is
there any equivalent. It was done by Winston, which was a series of science
fiction books oriented towards teens, mostly written by Lester Del Rey, Don
Wollheim and Evan Hunter under a lot of pseudonyms. And it was really a superior
series and it really got you excited and looking at more. That's it. Oh, okay,
thank you. How did you get involved in the fan structure? Actually, I saw a
letter in a science fiction magazine. I was pretty poor as a kid. But we did
have a drugstore across the street with its corner newsstand and so on. So in
order to get away with as much as possible, you know, we'd go over there and I'd
read some of the stuff out of the magazines at the drugstore newsstand. And
since I was good friends with the pharmacist's son, he was more tolerant towards
me. And I saw this letter and this guy was talking about he had an amateur
magazine or fanzine down in Alabama. And I thought that was great. So I wrote
and suddenly discovered that I was part of an institution.
Sorry about that. I was at an institution called the Science Fiction Fandom that
had been around since the 30s, at least, and was extremely large international
in scope. And this would be about when I was 12 years old. And I've been sort of
more or less involved in it ever since. It became pretty obvious to me after
getting into it for a while that if I was going to afford it, I was going to
have to do something to make money in it because they had conventions in various
parts of the country which took money. And the best contact was by getting a
mimeograph of your own and producing your own little magazine. And that takes
money, and I didn't have any of it. How did you start the Mirage, then, the
fanzine? Well, that basically was the reason. We started with the fanzine which
was run off actually at a school at the beginning because we didn't have
anything else. And you'd got some reasonably good reactions, so I started
building up from there. While I was doing that, actually, I had correspondence
already with an enormous number of people, both professional and fan. I had so
much correspondence, I can't believe how many people I was contacting on a
regular basis. And so I started tapping them and created the fanzine Mirage. The
addition of a $40 surplus mimeograph found in an old store, which I still own,
by the way, and which still works, I was able to start putting out a fanzine
called Mirage. And for the next 10 years, that was sort of the bedrock of my
contact with everybody else. And I discovered very quickly that you could make
at least a little bit of money out of it. So, I got the idea of why not doing
side booklets. I was serious and constructive at the same time that everybody
else was being just sort of kid hobbyist. I really had a magazine that discussed
the literature, discussed the writers and so on past and present, at a time when
very few of these were coming out. And so I attracted a rather large audience of
collectors and professional writers and artists and so on. And I was able to
create out of that the Mirage Press, which started off again as mimeographed
publications and then later grew as capital grew into a hardcover and quality
paperback publishing account. And if I understand it, those books are mostly
nonfiction studies of bibliographies and authors and so forth? You can't compete
with Doubleday. I mean, let's face it. You can't compete with Doubleday, Simon &
Schuster, and so on for the good stuff in fiction. And although I did do a
little bit of fiction, getting into print some books of work that I thought was
very, very neglected. You really have to promote fiction. Whereas nonfiction and
reference material is always a heavy market and there's been a growing market
for it. And so I concentrated in that end. And we came up with some rather
successful books, Guide to Middle Earth, which in its Ballantine form, which I
still own a piece of, is still selling well. An atlas of fantasy.
We did three books on sword and sorcery fiction before the comic books
discovered Conan. We did essays. We did critical studies, Jack Williamson, for
example, and H.G. Wells, that kind of thing. And occasionally we did rather odd
materials, such as a collection of all of the Ferdinand Feghoot bad puns that had
been published over the years, this kind of thing. Mostly though, we were
serious reference works, and we still have a number of them that are standard.
Now, how did you publish those books? You designed them and got the material and
so forth and sent them to a job or some kind, a guy, I don't know, a publisher?
Well, no, I was the publisher. As I say, you started off. I started off with a
bibliography of H.P. Lovecraft, which I did myself. Put it together,
mimeographed it, with the help of August Derleth, who owned the rights to the H
.P. Lovecraft material at the time. And sold it for what in 1960 was a
horrendous fee of a one dollar. And we sold a hundred of them. And I was
floored. It cost me about $40 to produce it. And then the late David H. Keller,
who was an old-time science fiction and fantasy writer, said, I have this one
novelette that's never been published. Would you be interested in it? So I did a
edition of that also in mimeograph, illustrated and signed edition, though. We
did only a hundred and seventy-five of them. We sold it to $2, and it went. And
we did five or six mimeographed items and had an increasing complexity in size,
and they succeeded extremely well. And, of course, the only thing that stopped
me from going further right at the beginning was, of course, I didn't have any
money.
And therefore it became a scramble to find various partners and so on who had
money. And once I got capital from them, I was able to get projects that were
floating around, good ideas. Sometimes I originated the idea. In the case of
Guide to Middle-Earth, it was simply a case of seeing this enormous concordance
to J.R.R. Tolkien, published in multiple parts in a fanzine with a circulation
of a few hundred and saying, you know, that would make a really successful book.
Tolkien's about to hit. And so I wrote him when I suggested that we do the book.
Once we had some capital, we had a typesetter and other stuff. So we designed
the book and typeset the book, got the cover, put everything together, and then
we went to Ann Arbor, Michigan, to have it printed and found, because that's the
short-run book capital of the nation. There's wall-to-wall book publishers there
all specializing in smaller runs. And we used our contacts with people with
other publishers who had been doing specialty publishing for years. And we went
out there and made a good deal, established our credit, and we had a string of
very large successes. Okay, good. Let me go ahead and ask you when and why you
decided to become a writer. Yeah, that's a little more complicated.
I started... I'd always known I was going to be a writer. I mean, there just was
never any question in my mind. But it was just sort of something that you never
really sat down and did. I used to play around with stories here and there. John
Campbell was a big help. During the 60s, I would float ideas and fragments off
him and he would be very, very nice and tell me exactly what was wrong. Of
course, what infuriated everybody about John Campbell was that the man had been
editing for 40 years and he could put his finger on something and tell you
exactly what you were doing wrong. It was terribly infuriating to discover that
he was right in almost every case. He saw why he did it from 39 until he died.
And as a result of being able to have the help of people like Campbell and
August Derleth and a lot of really established writers and editors in the field,
I was able to get a good recognition of exactly what was required in the field.
It just was a matter of sitting down and doing it. And what provided the kick
was that in 1975, I had all sorts of things go wrong at the same time. I was
having job problems. I was teaching and there was sort of a constant war there.
I had just had a romance breakup, and my partner and extreme source of capital
in Mirage Press had had a mental breakdown and had to be institutionalized,
which left me without capital and with a lot of debt. And everything just looked
downhill. On top of that, I had to have an operation on the roof of my mouth
that had it not been successful, the infection that was there would have killed
me. And so I'm thinking, oh my God, I could be dead. So if I'm going to write it
all, I better do it. So I sent out a typewriter, and there was really no
question in my mind as to what I'd do first. And I had been playing around with
an idea for years and years and years. There's even a short fanzine version of
it at 20 years old, called Jungle or Jungle of Stars. There were a lot of code
words, but jungle was always in it. And I sat down and wrote the thing. I wrote
it, it had been around so long in my mind and in discussions and so on, that
there were just no problems, no resistance, no having to think it out or
anything else. And I wrote it solidly in about two and a half, three weeks, and
then sent it off. And it's a good old fashioned type. It's a science fiction
murder mystery. Very much at home in the old sounding Analogs. And so on, even
though that has some modern touches to it. And Judy-Lynn Del Ray, who had just
become editor of Ballantine, which was soon to have a science fiction line named
after her, took a look at it. And we'd known each other for about 15 years. And
she put off reading it for quite a long time because she was afraid that if it
was terrible that she said so, that she'd blow our friendship or something.
Finally, she said, we got together at a convention and she admitted to me all
this. And she said, OK, I'll read it, but be prepared. And about four days
later, I get a phone call and she said, Hey, this is great. I want to buy it.
And that was the first sale.
The money there paid off a lot of medical bills and so on. And also, since I had
sold, it made me feel a little better, a little more confident. Oddly enough, I
didn't really immediately turn around and start writing anything else. I tried
to take care of a whole lot of stuff. And it wasn't until the next summer that I
was actually able to sit down and think, gee, what do I want to do next?
OK. Yeah, that's good. I want to talk just a little bit about the well. We don't
have time to talk about all your books. I've read them. But I wanted to specify
or focus on a couple of things. One thing that fascinates me about all your
books are your dedications. I learned just as much from reading those, I think,
as I do reading the books. And one of the things that fascinated me in
particular was the dedication of Twilight at the Well of Souls, where you talked
about the origin of the well world idea at this National Park in Washington.
That's right. Could you expand on that? OK. Well, that just sort of leads into
where I was, where I just broke off. I've had an habit, Elm, every year since I
have been employed and been making money and been reasonably successful to try
and go someplace every year in the summertime that I haven't been before. I
sometimes go back to play favorite places as well. But I always like to put at
least one place in. And in 1974, I'd gone up to Alaska and trooped around the
state for four to six weeks. And I had to go through Washington State to get
there, of course. And I looked around and I said, gee, this is real pretty. But
I've never really had time to stay in the state of Washington. So I made it a
point that the next time I could, I was going to come back and just spend time
doing nothing but exploring Washington State. And in 1976 I did. I went up there
and just rented a car and my general technique is to point it in any direction
and just simply cover the area, get lost and then get unlost again, and poke
into everything that can be done. There's lots of national parks. I'm a big fan
of the national park system. And I am also was delighted with state of
Washington because I have a passion for childhood for ferry boats. In a state
with 22 ferry boats. And I had gone actually in the middle of the state, mostly
to take a ferry boat across Lake Roosevelt. And I'm looking at the map after
taking the ferry across, and I see this long lake that I've never really heard
of before called Lake Shellan. And so I went up to it. I originally thought it
was a dammed lake, but it turned out to be not an artificial thing at all. It
turned out to be a 55-mile long, one-mile wide glacial lake. Natural lake with a
big powerhouse. They put a turbine on it at the end. And a town supporting it,
Shellan. And I saw that there was a passenger ferry that went up, no roads. So
the next day I caught the ferry, the Lady of the Lake, which is a mail boat,
drops people off, runs ladders up sheer cliffs, gets people off and on, and
finally winds up 55 miles up Lake in the village of Tahican. Tahican is an old
logging town. They used to cut logs up there and then just dump them in the lake
and they float down to Shellan. It's now the National Park Service headquarters
for the National Recreation Area there and North Cascades National Park has a
small lodge. So I was able to get a room there, and I discovered that when that
boat turns around at 12.45 in the afternoon, there is no way out. You are at
most isolated. I think I had already been all over Alaska and this was the most
isolated I ever felt. You're surrounded by sheer mountains on three sides, the
lake on the fourth. You can turn on a radio and you just can't get anything. The
combination of mountains and geography and so on just block it all out. It's
just totally isolated. There's no roads. There's no telephone or telegraph wires
or anything. And I got to sitting by the lake that night and talking with some
people. And I got the idea for this large world built by a long dead race and so
on, and I didn't really have much of an idea of what it was. And they do have a
service out of Stahecon that will take you up to Trailhead. And so I went up to
Trailhead and I wound up walking down. I'm a great hiker as long as the
directions down. I'm afraid I've never been to the bottom of the Grand Canyon
because I can get down there but I can't get back up. But here was a trail that
was tailor made for me, it was down the Cascades. All the way. So I took it and
it took about eight and a half hours to walk the whole distance. And during that
time you go through eight climate zones. You start off in the snow, you wind up
in a rain forest. And some of the changes are rather abrupt. You just go around
a switch bag and it just changes from one climate to another, each with its own
different plants and insects and occasional mammals. Even the birds seem to be
different. And I thought, yeah, this is how that big world would be like. So
even though I was on my way down, I was kind of scribbling ideas. And I got the
idea for this giant world composed of basically worldlets. Different, abrupt,
geography, climate, landforms, you name it. Each with its own dominant race.
By the time I hit bottom I hit it pretty well worked out, although I didn't
really know what the shape of the things were gonna be. I wish I could take
credit for just going to a game board, but it didn't occur to me, until I had
gotten back home. And I was discussing the idea with a science fiction fan named
Ben Yalow, the son of the Nobel winner, Rosalyn Yalow. And he says, Why don't
you just use an Avalon Hill game board? And I thought, Yeah, that would work. So
we got out an Avalon Hill map, a war game map, and a little trusty calculator.
We laid a grid of these hexagons around a roughly Earth-sized world. Of course,
you cannot cover a sphere with hexagons. So that means we had the north zone and
the south zone, which would be the embassy's entry and exit point. That would
cover our sphere. And then it was just simply a matter of sitting down, listing
what was required to do, what kind of creatures and land, climate and so on, I
would have to do for the route of the story, dropping by Avalon Hill, which I
lived very near at the time, taking out some blank maps, and just working it out
from there. How many books did you intend when you started? One. Midnight Stands
Alone. As a matter of fact, if I had thought that I was going to write any more
in the series, I would have done a few things differently in Midnight that
caused me no end of problems later, because it was very nice when you were just,
you know, if you needed an impassable hex for a particular plot problem, you
just simply stuck one there. And if you needed one with a different level of
technology, you simply stuck it there. For plot purposes. But when you had to
expand the map, and when you had to make it a much wider, more panoramic type of
thing, I discovered that some of the early sins that I had committed for
expediency in Midnight caused me no end of map problems when I went from, say,
six or eight hexes going this way to dozens or even hundreds going out from it.
The thing is that Midnight was the book that made me. I took it, I was
proofreading it at the World Science Fiction Convention in 76, and Judy Lindell
Ray came up and said, when you going to do your next book? And I just couldn't
resist it, it wasn't completely proofread or anything yet. I just picked it up
and handed it to her and said, here. And she took it home, and four days after I
got home, I get a call from her saying it's terrific, it's better than the first
year real writer and, you know, the whole flattery bit, and she bought that, and
then she proceeded to schedule
it in what was not a very nice way. Basically, it was the non-leader. The leader
book, of course, is the one that gets all the money and all the promotion for
any given month. It was not a leader, because that's usually determined by how
much money it's paid. It was brought out in July, which is one of the worst book
-buying months of the year. People are on vacation, colleges are out, you name
it, you know. And with no fanfare, it never did get one major review in the
science fiction media at all. And so it was just sort of dropped there. But
something caught. And I wish I knew exactly what was done accidentally so that I
could do it again on purpose. Because particularly when the college had started
opening up again in September, the sales of the thing just sort of started going
through the roof. And I discovered when I tried to get a couple of extra copies
for people, in early October, I called up Ballantine, and they said, I'm sorry,
it's out of print. I said, what do you mean, it's out of print? What did you do,
print? 25,000? No they hadn't. They'd done a full major print run, and they'd
sold out of it. It turned out that for reasons that even they were shocked at,
and nobody's been able to quite figure out yet how the word got around, the book
became the biggest selling non-media title they had. I mean, they did have Star
Wars, you know. But beyond that, beyond the media stuff, I was the biggest
seller of the year. And that's, you know, one of the ways to get big fast and
get your career cemented is to come in from the movies or be some kind of
personality or something and come in and get promoted right from the beginning,
or have a movie made of your first book so that your second book gets really
big, you know, the way Stephen King did it, that kind of thing. A way that gets
equal attention and respect is a book that has literally dropped in as just a
make-do book. A book that never is expected to go anywhere. They don't put any
money into it. They don't put any promotion. They hardly even send out review
copies, and the thing becomes a big hit anyway. That impresses me. And so it was
really Midnight that made my career. Yeah, that's interesting. Okay. Where, in
the whole scheme of the books, the whole five-novel set, where did the
Markovians go wrong? Oh, well. I have this one problem with them, with
discussing specific things, and that is the fact that, really, the question of
where the Markovians went wrong, that was an after-race, of course. A dope
thing. It's something that's really speculated on, but you never really know. I
like to give the reader some kind of feeling. I like to let sort of the books
speak for themselves on those problems. I keep running into all sorts of things
as to whether or not Nathan Brazil, who is the hero of three out of the five, is
or is not God. And he alternately claims to be and alternately shoots himself
down, but he lies a lot. So nobody's really quite sure. He gives several
different things, and it's left up to the reader to decide. I think some of
those questions are best left undecided. Of course the Markovians, what the
foundation of the Markovians thing is the same, I use this theme in a number of
other books, is that utopia is unremittingly boring,
that there is no such thing as a
perfect society. And that the thing that we do is we strive to create a perfect
society. And that is a good thing. And that produces, in many cases, a lot of
good results. But if we ever attained this thing, I mean we'd be nothing but
human bees, we'd be a beehive. As far as happiness is concerned, I
mean we can give everybody a lobotomy, and they'll run around being very happy.
But they're not human anymore, I don't think. In order to keep our creative
spark, our outward urges, our excitement, and everything else, there can be no
such thing as perfection attained. And this is exactly what the Markovians tried
for. They tried for perfection attained, and they attained it. They got to the
point where they were gods, literally. Where their devices could conjure up
anything they wanted, just the mere thought of it. I sense that it pointed out
to me that they're sort of like the Krell in the old movie Forbidden Planet. And
that they reached this godhead status. But the Krell experiment failed, because
they couldn't control their passions. And the Markovian experiment succeeded,
and they literally became gods. Then they became miserable. There was nothing
left to attain. There was nothing left to know. There was nothing left, you
know, you had a bunch of preachers who'd spent millions of years rising to this
point. And they sit around and they say, is this all there is?
So, the idea of the great experiment that came about was to redo it. To
literally start the Markovians over from scratch with different kinds of
creatures, different environments, with no real value system. I mean, they have
to develop their own unique value systems, and they do. And as a result, they're
grown and they're tested on this laboratory world, the well world. And then they
were the ones that worked, the ones that showed promise of survival, were then
set into motion out throughout the universe, including man. And they had the
hope that eventually one of these races would reach a state of perfection that
would not be empty or hollow. Now, I personally believe that when you reach that
state, it is empty and hollow. But that's just my feeling. Other people might
certainly do think differently. Okay, that's exactly the way I read it. And that
was what I would have said myself if I were asked on it. The incredible variety
of alien types you have in Well World. I'm always interested in how a science
fiction author thinks up his aliens. Do you have any special ways that you go
about that? Not particularly. I used a variety of things. In some cases, a good
pictorial natural history text will give you more weird creatures than you've
ever seen, which can be modified. Some came out of mythology. Some came more or
less direct out of Fantasia. Sources like that. And a few came out of comic book
concepts. You just draw them in from all over and you use basic shapes and basic
types. And then you adjust them to what would happen if these were real, sentient,
intelligent, you know, creatures. I found very, very little trouble in
coming up with an enormous variety of them. I'm not sure whether I could come up
with 1,560, which is the number I would have to to visit every hex in the Well
World. But I've had no trouble coming up with the 200 or 300 so far. Okay. In
regard to the Well World, and not only the Well World, but even in, say, the Web
of the Chosen and Jungle of Stars, I've noticed almost a chakrar motif, I'd call
it, of transformation. You know, where humans are transformed or creatures are
transformed. Is that just coincidental or do you have...? Well, in some books,
it's coincidental, in some books it's not. In some books it's even cynical, in
the sense that it's a fun thing to do. It's a fun thing to deal with. We have,
for example, in the Well World, basically a Wizard of Oz motif, you know, where
you're able to, you're taken out of this very unpleasant society, and you're
suddenly given a new chance in this new and colorful world as something else.
And, of course, the appeal of it, I realized later to the reader, is that they
can imagine themselves as almost anything in that setting. Well, in terms of
transformation generally,
it is a fun-type thing to deal with. It is something where you can make
statements. For example, you know, which is more important form or substance?
You can delve into pretty deep things with it, but at the same time it has a
great deal of variety. There's, as I say, a great many things that you can do
with it, and it seems to strike a chord in a lot of other people, so I use it a
fair amount. I don't use it exclusively. I've written a World War II novel, I've
written a futuristic political thriller, where nobody gets changed in anything,
and there are even some science fiction novels in line where really nobody gets
transformed. I think people start looking, I think I can examine almost any
outer space motif and give you something where people can say, hey, they changed
from this to this. In the case of jungle, nobody really changes them, and what
you've got is parasites. There's no real transformation there. You're just,
that's an old tried and true thing where you've got the parasitic creature
inhabiting whose body you don't know. And I don't consider that a transformation
book at all. Well, I have done, in case of Web of the Chosen, that was a, that
is my least favorite book of the ones that I have done. There are several
reasons for that. One of which is that most people do not see it as the
burlesque it was intended.
Number two, after all the hullabaloo over midnight, they didn't review midnight
at all, but everybody reviewed Web of the Chosen. And everybody looked at Web of
the Chosen, all the big, big-shot reviewers, and not a single one of them saw
anything odd or unusual, or even funny, about creatures who take over worlds by
crapping on their lawns.
And instead they reviewed this as a serious, sober, political novel and so on,
and totally missed the point, and they decided that I was just an incompetent
hack because I, you know. Now, if they've done this with Midnight, I could have
taken the comparison to a lot of other novels, they've done it with a number of
my serious books, but they didn't. They did it with this one. And I was very,
very disappointed to discover that most people didn't realize that Web of the
Chosen was a burlesque of science fiction clichés. Including me. Including my
own. But basically, 40's and 50's clichés. And, uh, it's apparently very few
people who really understood that until I point out how absurd some of the
premises are, and then all of a sudden I say, oh yeah, gee, that's funny. You
know, I started with the idea of an alien mastermind sitting in orbit trying to
remember the plot of the B picture to take over the world right. Ha ha ha. And
going on from there... Uh, I mean, I don't write one kind of book. I write lots
of different kinds of books. I write bitterly satirical books. I write funny
satirical books. And I write serious novels. And, um, I like to let the novels
speak for themselves, but I'm discovering that, uh, much of my audience has, uh,
no sense of humor unless I hit them with a pie in the face on page 150. I think
most people, I had the opposite problem with a book called And The Devil Will
Drag You Under. So, uh, where it was very clear, very close to the start, that
this was, uh, going to be a, a funny book, a slapstick sort of book. And, um,
there are some very serious things addressed in And The Devil Will Drag You
Under. Uh, there are some very serious scenes in it. And, uh, I've never seen
anyone notice these. Because they're, they're so, having so much fun back with
the burlesque. But, um, you know, what can you do? Well, you mentioned another
book too, a few moments ago. The, uh, you mentioned a serious political
thriller, I assume that's War of Shadows. Yeah, War of Shadows
is the only uh book of mine that's likely to become a movie at
some point. That's what I wondered about. I wondered how it sold, and it seemed
to me to be an obvious, uh, kind of a movie book. What, what are the
possibilities? Well, it sold terribly, uh, because it was badly mis-marketed.
Uh, it was sold as a, um, as a far out science fiction thing. It was sold as a
sort of a paperback version of an analog. Uh, it was badly packaged, badly
distributed, badly promoted. And it, it didn't sell all that well, but it did
sell to the movies. Yeah, it would make an excellent movie. I hope somebody
picks it up. Well, if somebody picked it up, I mean, I'm getting paid every
year, on rights for it, and he's still talking about doing it, and they've got a
script now. But, uh, a lot of things get optioned to movies. So we, we'll wait
and see. I could have optioned a couple of other things, but I didn't like the,
the deals. For example, uh, uh, Filmation wanted to buy The Well World. And, uh,
I discovered very quickly that what they really wanted to do was to keep him
being sued while they did something, uh, while they played around with the
gimmick for a Saturday morning TV cartoon series. So I turned him down. There's
some hope that, um, uh, the British are very, very interested in doing it, as a,
uh, as a radio serial. I'd love to see that. Uh, I, I hope that comes off, but
the negotiations are out of my hands. Yeah, okay, let me, let me move along for
a few minutes to the, um, the one you're working on now. I assume you're still
working on it, The Four Lords of the Diamond. Yeah, I've done three. I have the
fourth one to do. Uh, unlike The Well Books, this is a, uh, this is really a
single novel in four volumes. Uh, it's just the kind of idea that you must do
that way. Uh, otherwise you have the world's largest book and it has to be
priced terribly and nobody will buy it. Uh, Four Lords is, uh, there for several
reasons. Number one, of course, uh, the real problem that you have when you have
a successful series like The Well is the same problem that say George Reeves had
as Superman. You get terribly typecast. Not only that, everybody wants you to
play Superman, you know, and don't, don't want to play anything else. And if
you're serious about your career, you've got to do other things. Uh, and, um, so
they, they kept, kept coming after me to do well book after well book. And I
said, I said, wait a minute. I've got to stop and not do any well books for a
while. Quite a while. And I've got to do other things. And I've got to
reestablish the fact that I am a serious novelist and I'm not going to, going to
sell out like this or else I'm never going to be able to write things I want to
write. Uh, it's very seductive because the money's very good. But of course, um,
my, I've also been one of those people that's been terribly disappointed reading
the fourth volume in a good three volume series. You know, the more you do, if
the, if the books are not up to the previous books, they're, they're even more
of a disappointment. So I sat down and said, uh, okay, they want another series.
Let's do this. This had originally been outlined as a single novel, but it was
pretty obvious that it couldn't be done as a single novel. Uh, just simply for
size and cost. And, uh, it has a tremendous number of the elements that I have
become known for. It has a lot of new material as well. It has a lot of
political commentary. It has a lot of social commentary in it. It is also slam
bang action, Machiavellian intrigue and everything else, because, uh, nobody's
going to read your message if you're not, if you don't entertain first.
And these are four worlds in one system that are basically a prison planet series.
And you get dropped on there.
And the foundation idea, which appeals to me an awful lot, is that alien race discovers us before we discover them,
decides that it can't win a war against us.
Maybe they're just not as many of them, or there's technological problems or something like that.
So they study us and study us, and they discover that as in all human societies, there is this massive criminal syndicate.
And that these criminal syndicate leaders are mostly imprisoned for life on the four lords of the diamond, the Wharton diamond.
These four worlds.
What the aliens do is they contact these bitter super crooks, and
they take out a contract on human civilization. They provide the technology, and
the four lords, the four syndicate chiefs, provide the expertise, know-how, and
so on, to bring down the government and maybe the social system, maybe
everything, of human civilization. The reward that they're offered is that the
four worlds have a biological trap. You die if you ever leave, and the aliens
seem to have a way around it. And so the ultimate reward would be if you destroy
human civilization, you not only get your revenge, but then you get to get off
the planet and pick up the pieces and become the bosses yourself. So it becomes
a big deal, and the idea is if they've got to go into this warden diamond, and
anybody they send in is gonna get this disease, and it's gonna be stuck there
the same way, which means they're going to have problems with their loyalties.
If you keep somebody loyal. And they've got to go down there and try and find
out what the aliens are, where they are, because nobody's seen them. Nobody
knows anything about them. It's all being done by proxy. They've got to find out
as much of the plot as possible, and at the same time, buy enough time to
prepare by hopefully knocking off the four lords of the diamond. Uh,
fascinating. So you have four different worlds, four exotic adventure-type
worlds, uh, uh, each one of which is quite different. And, uh, uh, the criminal
leaders are all different as well. Some of them, uh, you might like better than
the, uh, than the people who are leading human civilization. And some of them
you won't. And, uh, the entire thing is that throughout it all, uh, you're
trying to find out exactly why the aliens are there, what they're doing, who
they are, everything about them. And there are just enough clues sprinkled along
that maybe, hopefully not, somebody will be able to figure it out. Uh, I haven't
done the last one yet. I might tell you that, um, my editor doesn't know how it
ends. My wife doesn't know how it ends. Uh, nobody with me knows how it ends.
Nobody with me knows the solution at the moment. Uh, and because the four books
are happening simultaneously in four different places, what I'm doing is, um, I,
I can't have any foreknowledge. I've got to put some distance between each book,
so I'm writing something else between each of the four books. Right now I'm in
the middle of a, uh, of a very different kind of novel. And, uh, a fantasy
novel, as a matter of fact. And when I finish that, then I'll do the last of the
four lords. Yeah, I was fascinated with the first two. Um, it's one of the few
series that I am anxiously awaiting the, the outcome of it. Listen, we are at
the end of the tape. Can, uh, can we just change the tape quickly and ask you
some more? A few more.